why containers should use overlaybd images (#436)
containerd/overlaybd: docs/ctimg.md

3. **Stability and security are non-negotiable.** Containers have
   become the infrastructure of internet businesses: the image stack
   sits on the serving path of every workload, so it must be rock-solid
   — downtime is measured in lost revenue. And since these workloads
   are multi-tenant, the storage interface is part of the security
   perimeter as well.

4. **One format, multiple runtimes.** The same image should serve
   ordinary runc containers and VM-based secure containers — and
   ideally non-Linux guests such as Windows containers — without
   per-runtime variants or separate image pipelines.

Each of these, taken alone, can be addressed by existing technology.
Taken together, they rule out all conventional approaches.

## Why Filesystem-based Images Fall Short

Existing image stacks fall into two architectural camps:

- **Filesystem-based images.** The dominant OCI tar+gzip format is
  served through overlayfs; lazy-pull variants (eStargz, SOCI) defer
  extraction but keep tar and filesystem semantics; single-filesystem
  images (squashfs, EROFS) and FUSE-based formats (Nydus/RAFS) take the
  same file-level approach. Whenever the consumer is a VM — as in

>   secure containers — the filesystem must additionally be shared into

Reviewer: Not sure this comment is correct. erofs can go with merging without overlayfs so that it can be used directly via diskfile - https://erofs.docs.kernel.org/en/latest/merging.html

Author: fixed

archive structure and filesystem semantics — every first access still
fetches file-by-file through the serving stack, and in secure
containers that shared-filesystem path lands on the critical path as
well.

**Efficiency.** Whole-image pulls from thousands of simultaneously
starting containers saturate the registry and the network, and
traditional P2P only mirrors whole images between peers — every
container still fetches the entire image. File-level stacking resolves
each file access (open, stat, readdir, and so on) by searching every
layer's directory tree top-down — O(n) in the number of layers — and
read-only filesystem images must likewise stack through overlayfs,
inheriting the same walk. The first
modification to lower-layer data triggers a copy-up of the entire
file, a recurring cost proportional to file size, not write size. And
for secure containers, virtio-fs (or 9p) turns every lookup, getattr,
and open into a separate cross-VM FUSE round-trip, so a single open()
on a nested path may incur five or more round-trips: cheap operations
made expensive one round-trip at a time across a VM boundary.

**Stability and security.** Served into a VM or through

> FUSE/fscache, filesystem state lives in a userspace daemon; if it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FUSE/virtio-fs, filesystem state lives in a userspace daemon; if it
```

 fscache should not be grouped with FUSE here. FS-Cache is a kernel caching facility used by filesystems such as EROFS

3. **Stability and security are non-negotiable.** Containers have
   become the infrastructure of internet businesses: the image stack
   sits on the serving path of every workload, so it must be rock-solid
   — downtime is measured in lost revenue. And since these workloads
   are multi-tenant, the storage interface is part of the security
   perimeter as well.

4. **One format, multiple runtimes.** The same image should serve
   ordinary runc containers and VM-based secure containers — and
   ideally non-Linux guests such as Windows containers — without
   per-runtime variants or separate image pipelines.

Each of these, taken alone, can be addressed by existing technology.
Taken together, they rule out all conventional approaches.

## Why Filesystem-based Images Fall Short

Existing image stacks fall into two architectural camps:

- **Filesystem-based images.** The dominant OCI tar+gzip format is
  served through overlayfs; lazy-pull variants (eStargz, SOCI) defer
  extraction but keep tar and filesystem semantics; single-filesystem
  images (squashfs, EROFS) and FUSE-based formats (Nydus/RAFS) take the
  same file-level approach. Whenever the consumer is a VM — as in

>   secure containers — the filesystem is typically shared into the

Reviewer: This still conflates filesystem format with VM transport. A filesystem disk image such as EROFS can be composed natively and attached directly to the VM through virtio-blk, without virtio-fs or 9p.

Suggested wording:
 

```suggestion
  secure containers — Host-mounted filesystems are typically shared with a VM through virtio-fs or 9p. 
```

must serve internet businesses around the clock. Filesystem-level formats also
parse complex metadata (xattrs, ACLs, symlinks, device nodes) in host
or hypervisor context, exposing a large attack surface to untrusted
guest content — and virtio-fs/9p have even been shown to let guests
bypass memory-cgroup and ephemeral-storage accounting entirely,
because page population happens outside the sandbox
([Kata Containers #12203](https://github.com/kata-containers/kata-containers/issues/12203)).

**Runtime universality.** These formats are all Linux filesystem
machinery: a filesystem-level image assumes Linux-style semantics on
the consumer side, so none of them can serve a Windows container or
any non-Linux guest. Maintaining separate image variants and pipelines
for runc containers, secure containers, and Windows containers
multiplies build, test, and operational cost.

A block device sidesteps all of the above by construction: the
consumer runs its own filesystem on top, so metadata operations stay
local to the consumer, the serving path never has to parse filesystem
structures, and any OS that understands a block device can consume the
image.

> EROFS now proposes serving the image across the VM boundary as one or

Reviewer: `EROFS now proposes` is inaccurate. EROFS documentation states that single-device native merging has been usable since the initial EROFS version, while explicitmulti-device support has existed since Linux 5.16.

Suggested wording:

EROFS supports native sub-filesystem merging and can expose a merged view through one or more block devices, including virtio-blk for VM workloads. This avoids overlayfs layer walks for that deployment path, while EROFS remains read-only and requires a separate writable layer.

  whole-image pull. Those fetches are spread across peers with P2P
  distribution (dadi-p2proxy), relieving the registry precisely when
  thousands of containers start at once.

- **Compact, memory-resident index.** At image load time overlaybd
  merges all layer indices into a single LSMT index; in Alibaba's
  production environment, images larger than 50 GB have an average index
  under 300 KB. Thousands of concurrent instances keep their
  indices fully memory-resident with no eviction.

- **O(1) cross-layer lookup.** Because the layer indices are merged at
  load time, runtime block lookup is constant-time regardless of layer
  count — a linearized B+ tree with AVX-512 SIMD acceleration sustains
  hundreds of millions of QPS for metadata resolution. And the index
  merging algorithm for block layers is also much simpler than that for
  file system layers.

- **Directly writable.** The writable layer is part of the format
  itself, so writes need no extra overlayfs upper stacked on top —
  unlike read-only image formats, which must add one before the first
  write. The I/O stack stays simpler and more efficient end to end.

> - **No copy-on-write penalty.** The writable layer is indexed at

Reviewer: Not sure I fully understand this. `No copy-on-write penalty` is misleading because OverlayBD still redirects writes to an upper writable layer and updates its mapping. The advantage is that it does not copy unchanged data from the lower layer, rather than eliminating all CoW overhead.
 
Suggested heading and wording:

No copy-up amplification. A write is recorded in the writable layer at sector granularity, and the LSMT index is updated to reference the new location. Unmodified lower-layer blocks are not copied, so write amplification is proportional to the request size rather than the size of an entire file or qcow2 cluster.

 This distinguishes OverlayBD’s benefit without implying that allocation and index-update costs disappear.

Author: > it does not copy unchanged data

No copy, thus no copy penalty. 

Update mapping does not copy data.

  attached as a standard block device (virtio-blk, with vhost-user-blk
  a future option): the guest runs its own filesystem internally, so
  all metadata operations complete in-guest with zero cross-VM
  round-trips. Only data I/O crosses the boundary, at block granularity,
  and the guest OS merges adjacent requests before submission.

### Stability and security

- **Stable by construction.** Overlaybd's state lives in a thin,
  well-defined interface and on-disk format, so the service can recover
  from process crashes or restarts and re-attach the device. The core
  logic is just an LBA-to-data mapping — far simpler than a filesystem
  implementation — and the kernel block layer adds request queuing,
  retries, and error handling for free.

- **Minimal attack surface, sound isolation.** The host sees only a
  sequence of block reads and writes. It never has to parse guest
  filesystem metadata, never interprets symlinks or xattrs, and page
  accounting stays inside the guest — eliminating the virtio-fs/9p
  accounting-bypass class of issue.

### Runtime universality: one format

A block device is the one storage interface every runtime and OS

> supports. The same overlaybd image serves runc containers (via a

Reviewer: This conflates an image format with a concrete image. One OverlayBD image contains a particular filesystem and OS-specific contents; the same image cannot be used unchanged as both an ext4 Linux image and an NTFS Windows image.

Suggested wording:

The same OverlayBD format and OCI distribution pipeline can support runc containers, VM-based secure containers, and different guest operating systems. Image contents and filesystem choices remain platform-specific.
  
This also matches the more accurate wording already used in docs/README.md: `Separate OS-specific images can use the same OverlayBD format.`

Author: yes, the wording is meant to be the format.
